io_uring article (#195)
qdrant/landing_page: qdrant-landing/content/articles/io_uring.md

---
title: "Qdrant under the hood: io_uring"

> short_description: "The linux io_uring API offers great performance in certain cases. Here's how Qdrant uses it!"

Reviewer: I've some capital letter nitpicks. I believe it is good to be consistent.

I'm sure you'll be doing another pass to fix these before publishing, but I still hope they're useful :smile: 

```suggestion
short_description: "The Linux io_uring API offers great performance in certain cases. Here's how Qdrant uses it!"
```

introduce the alternative io\_uring based *async uring* storage backend on
Linux-based systems. Since its introduction, io\_uring has promised to improve
async throughput wherever the OS syscall overhead gets too high, which will
often occur in situations where software becomes *IO bound* (that is, mostly
waiting on disk).

## Storage and IO

Qdrant can store everything in memory, but it's often advisable to store data
to disk, so that it can survive a reboot and memory requirements can be reduced
(at the cost of some performance and disk requirements). Before io\_uring,
Qdrant used mmap to do its IO. This leads to some modest overhead (because the
kernel needs to continuously write back changes from memory to disk), but works
quite well with the asynchronous nature of Qdrant's core.

One of the great optimization tricks Qdrant pulls is quantization (either
scalar or [product](https://qdrant.tech/articles/product-quantization/)-based).
However, to apply this optimization after the fact, a *requantization* is
required. This operation generates a lot of disk IO (unless the collection
resides fully in memory, of course), so it is a prime candidate for possible
improvements.

> If you run Qdrant on linux, you can enable the io\_uring based storage backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you run Qdrant on Linux, you can enable the io\_uring based storage backend
```

with the following in your configuration:

```yaml
# within the storage config
storage:
	# enable the async scorer which uses io_uring
	async_scorer: true
```

You can return to the mmap based backend by either deleting the `async_scorer`
entry or setting the value to `false`.

## Benchmarks

> To run the benchmark, use a test instance of qdrant; if necessary spin up a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the benchmark, use a test instance of Qdrant; if necessary spin up a
```

kernel, so there's no copying overhead.

![io_uring diagram](/articles_data/io_uring/io_uring_diagram.svg)

Apart from avoiding copying overhead, the queue-based architecture lends
itself to multithreading (as item insertion/extraction can be made lockless),
and once the queues are set up, there is no further syscall that would stop
any user thread.

Servers that use this can easily get to over 100k concurrent requests. Today
Linux allows asynchronous IO via io\_uring for network, disk and accessing
other ports (e.g. for printing or recording video).

## And what about Qdrant?

Qdrant can store everything in memory, but not all data sets may fit, which can
require storing  on disk. Before io\_uring, Qdrant used mmap to do its IO. This
leads to some modest overhead in case of disk latency, because the kernel may
stop a user thread trying to access a mapped region, which incurs some context
switching overhead plus the wait time until the disk IO is finished. All in all,
this works reasonably well with the asynchronous nature of Qdrant's core.

One of the great optimization tricks Qdrant pulls is quantization (either

> scalar or [product](https://qdrant.tech/articles/product-quantization/)-based).

Reviewer 2: Can we maybe add a link to the scalar quantization article as well?

introduce the alternative io\_uring based *async uring* storage backend on
Linux-based systems. Since its introduction, io\_uring has promised to improve
async throughput wherever the OS syscall overhead gets too high, which will
often occur in situations where software becomes *IO bound* (that is, mostly
waiting on disk).

## Input+Output

Around the mid-90s, the internet took off. The first servers used a
process-per-request setup, which was good for serving hundreds if not thousands
of concurrent request. POSIX (and thus Linux) IO (Input+Output) was modeled in
a strictly synchronous way. The overhead of starting a new process for each
request made this model unsustainable. So servers started forgoing the process
separation, opting for the thread-per-request model. But even that ran into
limitations.

I distinctly remember when someone asked the question whether a server could
serve 10k concurrent connections, which at the time exhausted the memory of
most systems (because every thread had to have its own stack and some other
metadata, which quickly filled up available memory). So the synchronous IO
was replaced by asynchronous IO during the 2.5 kernel update, either via 

> `select` or `epoll` (the latter being a small bit more efficient, so most

Author: IIRC, `select` is POSIX while `epoll` is Linux-specific (and as I wrote a bit more efficient).

But even this crude form of asynchronous IO carries the overhead of at least
one system call per operation, which incurs a context switch - an operation
which is in itself not that slow (basically registers are stored and loaded
from a known good location), but the memory accesses required led to longer
and longer wait times for the CPU.

### Memory-mapped IO

Another way of dealing at least with file IO (which unlike network IO doesn't
usually have a hard time requirement) is to map parts of files into memory -
basically the system fakes having that chunk of the file in memory, so when
you read from a location there, the kernel interrupts you to load the needed
data from disk, and then sends you on your merry way, whereas writing to the
memory will also notify the kernel. Also the kernel can prefetch stuff while
the program is running, thus reducing the likelyhood of interrupts.

Thus there is still some overhead, but (especially in asynchronous
applications) it's far less than with `epoll`. The reason this API is rarely
used in web servers is that these usually have a large variety of files to
access (unlike a database, which can map its own backing store into memory

> once). Qdrant has used mmap from the beginning, of course.

Author: Fixed.

matters, some even going so far as moving a HTTP server into the kernel
(which of course brought its own share of problems). Others like intel added
their own APIs that ignored the kernel and worked directly on the hardware
(on intel hardware, that is).

Finally Jens Axboe took matters into his own hands and proposed a ring buffer
based interface called *io\_uring*. The buffers are not directly for data, but
for operations. User processes can setup a Submission Queue (SQ) and a
Completion Queue (CQ), both of which are shared between the process and the
kernel, so there's no copying overhead.

Apart from avoiding copying overhead, the queue-based architecture lends
itself to multithreading (as item insertion/extraction can be made lockless),
and once the queues are set up, there is no further syscall that would stop
any user thread.

Servers that use this can easily get to over 100k concurrent requests. Today
Linux allows asynchronous IO via io\_uring for network, disk and accessing
other ports (e.g. for printing or recording video).

## And what about Qdrant?

Qdrant can store everything in memory, but it's often advisable to store data

> to disk, so that it can survive a reboot and memory requirements can be reduced

Reviewer 3: My favorite topic https://github.com/qdrant/docs/issues/124

(at the cost of some performance and disk requirements). Before io\_uring,
Qdrant used mmap to do its IO. This leads to some modest overhead (because the

> kernel needs to continuously write back changes from memory to disk), but works

Author: isn't there also some kernel-induced latency with mmap (because the kernel may try to preload pages, etc.)?

entry or setting the value to `false`.

## Benchmarks

To run the benchmark, use a test instance of Qdrant; if necessary spin up a
docker container and load a snapshot of the collection you want to benchmark
with. You can copy and edit the following bash script to run the benchmark.

```bash
export QDRANT_URL="<qdrant url>"
export COLLECTION="<collection name>"

time seq 1000 | xargs -P 4 -I {} curl -L -X POST \
	"http://${QDRANT_URL}/collections/${COLLECTION}/points/recommend" \
	-H 'Content-Type: application/json' --data-raw \
	'{ "limit": 10, "positive": [{}], "params": { "quantization": { "rescore": true  } } }' \
	-s | jq .status | wc -l

time seq 1000 2000 | xargs -P 4 -I {} curl -L -X POST \
	"${QDRANT_URL}/collections/${COLLECTION}/points/recommend" \
	-H 'Content-Type: application/json' --data-raw \
	'{ "limit": 10, "positive": [{}], "params": { "quantization": { "rescore": true  } } }' \
	-s | jq .status | wc -l

time seq 2000 3000 | xargs -P 4 -I {} curl -L -X POST \
	"${QDRANT_URL}/collections/${COLLECTION}/points/recommend" \
	-H 'Content-Type: application/json' --data-raw \
	'{ "limit": 10, "positive": [{}], "params": { "quantization": { "rescore": true  } } }' \

> 	-s | jq .status | wc -l

Author: Agreed, but it makes it easier to replicate the benchmark.

---
title: "Qdrant under the hood: io_uring"
short_description: "The Linux io_uring API offers great performance in certain cases. Here's how Qdrant uses it!"
description: "Slow disk decelerating your Qdrant deployment? Get on top of IO overhead with this one trick!"
social_preview_image: /articles_data/io_uring/social_preview.png
small_preview_image: /articles_data/io_uring/io_uring-icon.svg
preview_dir: /articles_data/io_uring/preview
weight: 1
author: Andre Bogus
author_link: https://llogiq.github.io
date: 2023-06-21T09:45:00+02:00
draft: false
keywords:
  - vector search
  - linux
  - optimization
aliases: [ /articles/io-uring/ ]
---

> With Qdrant [1.3.0](https://github.com/qdrant/qdrant/releases/tag/v1.3.0) we

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With Qdrant [version 1.3.0](https://github.com/qdrant/qdrant/releases/tag/v1.3.0) we
```

introduce the alternative io\_uring based *async uring* storage backend on

> Linux-based systems. Since its introduction, io\_uring has promised to improve

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Linux-based systems. Since its introduction, io\_uring has been known to improve
```

> async throughput wherever the OS syscall overhead gets too high, which will

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
async throughput wherever the OS syscall overhead gets too high, which tends to
```

> often occur in situations where software becomes *IO bound* (that is, mostly

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
occur in situations where software becomes *IO bound* (that is, mostly
```

waiting on disk).

## Input+Output

Around the mid-90s, the internet took off. The first servers used a
process-per-request setup, which was good for serving hundreds if not thousands

> of concurrent request. POSIX (and thus Linux) IO (Input+Output) was modeled in

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
of concurrent requests. The POSIX Input + Output (IO) was modeled in
```

a strictly synchronous way. The overhead of starting a new process for each
request made this model unsustainable. So servers started forgoing the process
separation, opting for the thread-per-request model. But even that ran into
limitations.

I distinctly remember when someone asked the question whether a server could
serve 10k concurrent connections, which at the time exhausted the memory of
most systems (because every thread had to have its own stack and some other

> metadata, which quickly filled up available memory). So the synchronous IO

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
metadata, which quickly filled up available memory). As a result, the synchronous IO
```

was replaced by asynchronous IO during the 2.5 kernel update, either via
`select` or `epoll` (the latter being Linux-only, but a small bit more
efficient, so most servers of the time used it).

> But even this crude form of asynchronous IO carries the overhead of at least

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, even this crude form of asynchronous IO carries the overhead of at least
```

one system call per operation, which incurs a context switch - an operation
which is in itself not that slow (basically registers are stored and loaded
from a known good location), but the memory accesses required led to longer
and longer wait times for the CPU.

### Memory-mapped IO

Another way of dealing at least with file IO (which unlike network IO doesn't
usually have a hard time requirement) is to map parts of files into memory -
basically the system fakes having that chunk of the file in memory, so when
you read from a location there, the kernel interrupts you to load the needed
data from disk, and then sends you on your merry way, whereas writing to the
memory will also notify the kernel. Also the kernel can prefetch stuff while
the program is running, thus reducing the likelyhood of interrupts.

Thus there is still some overhead, but (especially in asynchronous
applications) it's far less than with `epoll`. The reason this API is rarely
used in web servers is that these usually have a large variety of files to

> access (unlike a database, which can map its own backing store into memory

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
access, unlike a database, which can map its own backing store into memory
```

> once).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
once.
```

### Combating the Poll-ution

> There were multiple experiments (open source or proprietary) to improve

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There were multiple experiments to improve
```

Reviewer 4: so many brackets makes the sentence hard to read

matters, some even going so far as moving a HTTP server into the kernel

> (which of course brought its own share of problems). Others like intel added

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
(which of course brought its own share of problems). Others like Intel added
```

their own APIs that ignored the kernel and worked directly on the hardware

> (on intel hardware, that is).

Reviewer 4: again with the brackets

> Finally Jens Axboe took matters into his own hands and proposed a ring buffer

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Finally, Jens Axboe took matters into his own hands and proposed a ring buffer
```

based interface called *io\_uring*. The buffers are not directly for data, but
for operations. User processes can setup a Submission Queue (SQ) and a
Completion Queue (CQ), both of which are shared between the process and the
kernel, so there's no copying overhead.

![io_uring diagram](/articles_data/io_uring/io_uring_diagram.svg)

Apart from avoiding copying overhead, the queue-based architecture lends
itself to multithreading (as item insertion/extraction can be made lockless),
and once the queues are set up, there is no further syscall that would stop
any user thread.

Servers that use this can easily get to over 100k concurrent requests. Today
Linux allows asynchronous IO via io\_uring for network, disk and accessing
other ports (e.g. for printing or recording video).

## And what about Qdrant?

Qdrant can store everything in memory, but not all data sets may fit, which can
require storing  on disk. Before io\_uring, Qdrant used mmap to do its IO. This

> leads to some modest overhead in case of disk latency, because the kernel may

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
led to some modest overhead in case of disk latency. The kernel may
```

stop a user thread trying to access a mapped region, which incurs some context

> switching overhead plus the wait time until the disk IO is finished. All in all,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
switching overhead plus the wait time until the disk IO is finished. Ultimately,
```

> this works reasonably well with the asynchronous nature of Qdrant's core.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
this works very well with the asynchronous nature of Qdrant's core.
```

> One of the great optimization tricks Qdrant pulls is quantization (either

Reviewer 4: We should really try and use professional wording. Qdrant doesn't pull tricks. It offers functionalities so that users can search and manipulate their data in better ways.

[scalar](https://qdrant.tech/articles/scalar-quantization/) or 
[product](https://qdrant.tech/articles/product-quantization/)-based).

> However, to apply this optimization generates a lot of disk IO (unless the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, this optimization method generates significant disk IO (unless the
```

> collection resides fully in memory, of course), so it is a prime candidate for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
collection resides fully in memory), so it is a prime candidate for
```

possible improvements.

If you run Qdrant on Linux, you can enable io\_uring with the following in your
configuration:

```yaml
# within the storage config
storage:
	# enable the async scorer which uses io_uring
	async_scorer: true
```

You can return to the mmap based backend by either deleting the `async_scorer`
entry or setting the value to `false`.

## Benchmarks

> To run the benchmark, use a test instance of Qdrant; if necessary spin up a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To run the benchmark, use a test instance of Qdrant. If necessary spin up a
```

docker container and load a snapshot of the collection you want to benchmark
with. You can copy and edit our [benchmark script](/articles_data/io_uring/rescore-benchmark.sh)
to run the benchmark. Run the script with and without enabling
`storage.async_scorer` and once. You can measure IO usage with `iostat` from
another console.

For our benchmark, we chose the laion dataset picking 5 million 768d entries.
We enabled scalar quantization + HNSW with m=16 and ef_construct=512.
We do the quantization in RAM, HNSW in RAM but keep the original vectors on

> disk (which was a network drive rented from Hetzner for the benchmark).

Reviewer 4: this is pretty good

Author: Thank you!

Note that in this case, the IO operations have relatively high latency due to
using a network disk. Thus, the kernel takes more time to fulfil the mmap
requests, and application threads need to wait, which is reflected in the CPU
percentage. On the other hand, with the io\_uring backend, the application
threads can better use available cores for the rescore operation without any
IO-induced delays.

Oversampling is a new feature that allows setting a factor, which is multiplied
with the `limit` while doing the search; then the results are re- scored using
the original vector and only then the top results up to the limit are selected.
Oversampling can improve accuracy at the cost of some performance.

## Discussion

Looking back, disk IO used to be very serialized; re-positioning read-write
heads on moving platter was a slow and messy business. So the system overhead
didn't matter as much, but nowadays with SSDs that can often even parallelize
operations while offering near-perfect random access, the overhead starts to
become quite visible. While memory-mapped IO gives us a fair deal in terms of

> programmer-friendlyness and performance, we can make a killing on the latter for

Reviewer 4: inappropriate to talk about "making a killing"

memory will also notify the kernel. Also the kernel can prefetch stuff while
the program is running, thus reducing the likelyhood of interrupts.

Thus there is still some overhead, but (especially in asynchronous
applications) it's far less than with `epoll`. The reason this API is rarely
used in web servers is that these usually have a large variety of files to
access (unlike a database, which can map its own backing store into memory
once). Qdrant has used mmap from the beginning, of course.

### Combating the Poll-ution

There were multiple experiments (open source or proprietary) to improve
matters, some even going so far as moving a HTTP server into the kernel
(which of course brought its own share of problems). Others like intel added
their own APIs that ignored the kernel and worked directly on the hardware
(on intel hardware, that is).

Finally Jens Axboe took matters into his own hands and proposed a ring buffer
based interface called *io\_uring*. The buffers are not directly for data, but
for operations. User processes can setup a Submission Queue (SQ) and a
Completion Queue (CQ), both of which are shared between the process and the

> kernel, so there's no copying overhead.

Reviewer 5: this better be a diagram

```bash
export QDRANT_URL="<qdrant url>"
export COLLECTION="<collection name>"
export CONCURRENCY=4 # or 8
export OVERSAMPLING=1 # or 4

time seq 1000 | xargs -P ${CONCURRENCY} -I {} curl -L -X POST \
	"http://${QDRANT_URL}/collections/${COLLECTION}/points/recommend" \
	-H 'Content-Type: application/json' --data-raw \
	"{ \"limit\": 10, \"positive\": [{}], \"params\": { \"quantization\": \
	{ \"rescore\": true, \"oversampling\": ${OVERSAMPLING} } } }" \
	-s | jq .status | wc -l

time seq 1000 2000 | xargs -P ${CONCURRENCY} -I {} curl -L -X POST \
	"${QDRANT_URL}/collections/${COLLECTION}/points/recommend" \
	-H 'Content-Type: application/json' --data-raw \
	"{ \"limit\": 10, \"positive\": [{}], \"params\": { \"quantization\": \
	{ \"rescore\": true, \"oversampling\": ${OVERSAMPLING} } } }" \
	-s | jq .status | wc -l

time seq 2000 3000 | xargs -P ${CONCURRENCY} -I {} curl -L -X POST \
	"${QDRANT_URL}/collections/${COLLECTION}/points/recommend" \
	-H 'Content-Type: application/json' --data-raw \
	"{ \"limit\": 10, \"positive\": [{}], \"params\": { \"quantization\": \
	{ \"rescore\": true, \"oversampling\": ${OVERSAMPLING} } } }" \

> 	-s | jq .status | wc -l

Author: Should I put it in a bash script somewhere on the page and link it from the article instead? I want people to have an easy way to reproduce the benchmark.

> 	-s | jq .status | wc -l

Author: Which leads me to a question: Which laion dataset did you choose, how did you pick the 5M entries and what did you use to embed them?

```

Run this script with and without enabling `storage.async_scorer` and once. You
can measure IO usage with `iostat` from another console.

For our benchmark, we chose the laion datasset with 5 million 768d entries.
We enabled scalar quantization + HNSW with m=16 and ef_construct=512.
We do the quantization in RAM, HNSW in RAM but keep the original vectors on
disk (which was a network drive rented from Hetzner for the benchmark).

For the time, we get the following wall clock times:

|       | mmap      | io\_uring |
|-------|-----------|-----------|
| 0..1k | 0m58.079s | 0m11.957s |
|1k..2k | 0m43.613s | 0m11.957s |

> |2k..3k | 0m41.378s | 0m12.681s |

Author: Ok.

As we can see, mmap gets faster as the OS fills up the caches, but there is
still some considerable overhead compared to io\_uring.

|          | oversampling | parallel | ~max IOPS | CPU% (of 4 cores) | time (s) (avg of 3) |
|----------|--------------|----------|-----------|-------------------|---------------------|
| io_uring |  	1         | 4        |  	4000   |      	200        |  12                 |
| mmap     |  	1         | 4        |  	2000   |      	 93        |  43                 |
| io_uring |  	1         | 8        |  	4000   |      	200				 |  12                 |
| mmap     |  	1         | 8        |  	2000   |      	 90        |  43                 |
| io_uring |  	4         | 8        |  	7000   |      	100				 |  30                 |
| mmap     |  	4         | 8        |  	2300   |      	 50        | 145                 |

Note that in this case, the IO operations have relatively high latency due to
using a network disk. Thus, the kernel takes more time to fulfil the mmap
requests, and application threads need to wait, which is reflected in the CPU
percentage. On the other hand, with the io\_uring backend, the application

> threads can fully use available cores for the rescore operation without any

Reviewer 5: on the benchmarks is saturates better than mmap, but definitely not `fully`

strong exploitation primitives. For these reasons, we currently consider it
safe only for use by trusted components."

With that said, the CVEs concerning io\_uring can by and large only be
triggered by local users, so if you set up your system tightly, there is
quite probably little reason to worry. Of course, as with performance, the
right answer is usually "it depends", so please review your personal risk
profile and act accordingly.

In the meantime, using mmap is also not without its own share of
[problems](https://db.cs.cmu.edu/mmap-cidr2022/).

## Best Practices

If your on-disk collection's query performance is of sufficiently high
priority to you, enable the io\_uring storage backend to greatly reduce
operating system overhead from disk IO. On the other hand, if your
collections are in memory only, activating it will be ineffective. Also note
that many queries are not IO bound, so the overhead may or may not become
measurable in your workload. Finally, on-device disks typically carry lower
latency than network drives, which may also affect mmap overhead.

Therefore before you roll out io\_uring, perform a simple benchmark (do a

> requantization of one of your collections with both mmap and io\_uring and

Author: I'll rephrase.
